I think just we head out to the restaurant.
I was talking about Harrison.
I, Bernard Cohen, who was in our, running our history of science department, took me down to see Harrison, I suppose, sometime in the 60s.
And at that time, he was living in New York, and he had these books.
I was really impressed.
They were three deep in the shelves, so that
take out the first row, there was a second row, there was a third row behind those.
And he had so many, uh, little, uh, textbooks, the sphere of Sacrobasco and so on.
He was very fastidious about his collations and he was very proud of the fact that he was more or less single-handedly making scientific book collecting a respectable subject, which he had done by also the
exhibition at the Grolier Club on 100 books famous in science.
That was basically his list, wasn't it?
That was basically his list.
He got a lot of help in making the list from Professor Cohen, and Cohen in turn consulted with a number of other specialists to make sure that the representation of different disciplines was about balanced rights.
Did you ever get any indication for Harrison why he stopped collecting?
Professor, that's an enigma for me, like an Arthur Houghton or a Marsden Perry.
The same thing happened to him that I saw happening to Berndibner and other people, that he just couldn't quite cope with the fact that the books were rising in price.
And in a certain way, yes, we want the two luncheons, one with the prawns with lobster sauce.
He was still collecting, but he was beginning to explore another field, which was early photography.
He had practically captured the market on Talbot's.
pencil of nature.
And he was also big into Sir Thomas Phillips.
So he was still very actively going after both of those kinds of materials.
But he had dropped out on the history of science things.
And then of course he put his collection up for sale.
And this turned out to create a big brouhaha, which you found out about.
Not really.
He had promised a lot of institutions various favors, but he was reluctant to give them the books outright because he wanted the books to be written up in the catalog as he wanted the catalog to be the monument to his collection.
So he was disappointed.
He felt that
Sotheby's had not described the books fully enough or properly enough to show the significance as to why he bought them and in turn he gave a lot of money to institutions so that they could go and bid for his books.
Yeah, see that's not unprecedented.
Streeter did that and Brindley did that too.
He urged them to go through John Fleming and the result of which was that John Fleming bought
nearly half the lots in the first auction and this created quite a stir because they felt it was illegal to sort of for the owner to hand out money to buy the books at his own auction.
It may have been done but it was not considered the honorable thing to do the result of which was that the dealers deliberately sat on their hands for the second auction and
and bought for their customers, but refused to buy for stock.
So the second auction flopped so badly that Sotheby's said, you know, we can't have this, and there was some sort of a falling out, and Harrison took back the rest of the books.
So that's why there are only two catalogs going from A through H.
And the I through the rest of the alphabet was never auctioned So eventually he sold it off sort of piece by piece to the Krauss company But he He did hang on to things and finally one time when I was down and
he agreed that Harvard should have all the Napiers and just essentially gathered them up and handed them over.
It was really wonderful because otherwise Harvard had, as this has happened to many art museums, buying around what you were expecting from a donor.
And in this particular case, those very important STC items would probably be forever missing from Harvard, excepting that Harrison
understood that they had been in his hundred books famous and science catalog and were the outstanding thing that harvard lacked from that catalog so harvard got them anyway well he decided to give them to us it was it was largely because i had been going down and talking with him every year sort of rain or shine because he he would blow hot and cold he was outraged at
Harvard during the student troubles of the 60s.
He thought they were conceding too much.
He had a number of other grievances and he was always
You know, fairly irascible.
So Harvard did get the, I remember just a couple of years ago.
Harvard got wonderful things from him.
Harvard is greatly in his debt.
But I guess sadly he never did get the catalog as a monument to his collection that he wanted.
That's right.
Never, never then existed.
So he lost on both sides, didn't he?
At least there would have been a Hornburg public collection here at Harvard.
There is a part of a Horvath collection here at Harvard.
It includes the Naratio Prima, which is the book which, until the Copernicus went for so high, held the record as being the highest auctioned book in the history of science.
And now it ties with the Copernicus.
Well, now you indicated on the way over that
You're a collector yourself, and we have really touched on that.
Maybe you can tell me a little bit about your own collecting activities.
I admired Harrison's collection of books, and the whole idea of early books I sort of caught on to as a result of going down and looking at his things.
I did not have much disposable income, but I did buy
a rare book from the Krauss company.
I still have the receipt for it.
I think I paid $12 for it.
I happen to recognize it as being the one volume out of a great long run that had a very, had a paper of very great interest to me from 1770.
So I bought this Singleton volume.
It was just out of broken debt, so it wasn't worth very much.
I suppose that was around 1960,
We can look when we get back, 64 maybe.
Then I found some Ephemerides, and I was rather interested in that for my research.
These are books that show positions of planets.
I remember buying one from Blackwell's,
I probably paid $150 for it, a book from 1532.
And that was my entree into serious book collecting.
Were you collecting them as artifacts or as adjuncts to your collection?
academic professional career?
At first it was very much as adjunct to what I was doing because the books were useful to me in looking up planetary positions and I made a lot of calculations to show how accurate the old tables were.
So I kept at it gradually moving
farther and farther upscale.
I've got a lot of very rare things.
I've had a number of things that were unique in America.
For a long time, I had what I believed to be the only copy of the first edition of Michael Mestland's astronomy textbook.
He was the teacher of Johannes Kepler.
And it's an interesting copy because it was owned by John Evelyn, the English diarist, and it has the date in it and the place where he bought it.
And he mentions in his diary buying books at that particular time.
How much has gotten that in England?
Yes, as a matter of fact, Korich has pointed out to me that it was coming up in the Evelyn auction.
And since that was not a collection of history of science, I didn't have the specialist dealers bidding for it.
So they bid for it for me and got it for me.
That's nice.
That's absolutely nice.
And I notice that you have much of the collection in your office.
I assume it's there and not at home?
That's more fireproof there.
So it's there for practical reasons.
Yes, it's expensive for me to do that.
because the insurance on the books would be a great deal less if I could have them at home.
Is it pleasure of ownership?
I use them regularly in teaching, in seminars or small classes.
I sometimes take a typical book along and even show it in my large lecture course.
Most of these don't have reprints.
So the first edition is the only edition?
It's interesting to be able to walk into class and say, this is Descartes' Principles of Philosophy.
It's the foundation of the
Cartesian system, which was absolutely in the vogue at the time that Newton wrote his Principia, and to be able to sort of hold it up and turn the pages and then show the slides enlarging those figures.
Or when we're talking about Tycho Brahe and how when he was a teenager he saw that the
prediction of where Jupiter and Saturn would be.
And their great conjunction in 1563 was wrong.
And to be able to hold up the book and say, right here is where it is.
This is exactly the kind of set of tables that he had where he was looking that up.
You're familiar with the courses that George Parker Winship taught here at Harvard, that Bill Jackson, I guess, taught later, and that Roger teaches now.
I know about those.
And I do take the history of science graduate students.
Now we'll switch off on this as soon as the other plate comes.
I take the, yes please, I take the history of science students in and show them books, try to pick out books where they can find interesting things by looking at the book itself as opposed to just knowing that the book exists.
Roger did a paper on these courses, starting with Winship's course in 1915.
I found out about the variance after I was well underway in the census.
So there was no possibility, essentially, of checking them.
It was funny because a colleague in Munich was so pleased with himself having found a variant and I pointed out to him that you're just using a facsimile of the book.
You don't realize that that's simply a paste over which the individual has done and he's made it look so much like type but it isn't.
That's an ink manuscript and that's not a printing variant.
And he was so chagrined that he knocked himself out to find a variant.
And he finally found one, and I don't even know where, because it really isn't that important to me.
But, well, would it be significant in any way textually?
Probably not.
No, not textually.
It's just a minor change in the types somewhere.
I suppose one might have got something more out about the printing history to have followed that, but... I found out about way too late.
There was no turning back at that point.
I don't see really where they are so... Horvitz, famous... Probably the rarest book in Horvitz, 100 books famous in the history of science, or famous in science, I'm all set up, is the Lobachevsky.
uh piece on the non-euclidean geometry and as far as i know haskell norman is the only person in the country to have a copy of it really when it came for the grolier club they had to borrow it from ussr it came just wrapped up in a newspaper with a string around it and everybody was so amazed that they trusted this thing so rare just to the post this way
But as they thought about it more, they realized this was probably the only way they could have got it out of the Soviet Union.
When was this?
Well, it was the exhibition that gave rise to that book.
So would that have been in 55 or something like that?
And how the copy got out that Haskell bought, I don't know.
But his book presumably will have some details.
Maybe at least say where it came from.
Well...
There are a lot of things, you know, you talk.
A lot of things you don't want to ask too many questions about.
Well, you ask, but they don't want to answer.
Mr. Scheide, he's a sweetheart of a man.
I don't know if you know Bill Scheide.
Oh, yeah, I do.
Lovely man.
And of course, a lot of the great things that he has, his father bought.
Like the Blickling homily, you know, the only Anglo-Saxon manuscript in North America.
It's named for the Blickling estate.
But you don't want to talk, you don't want to invoke too deeply, because he's not the one who bought it.
you know how the british government allowed that to slip out that's the one item that nicholas parker says when i asked him about it it's interesting because i always and then doing the copernic consensus copy down all the old shelf marks that are in the books i noticed that i took notes on that and uh
One day I was just thinking about it and I don't know how how I thought about it this way I I knew that the in Milan at the Braden's a library there was a First edition in the catalog, but no first edition present.
They have second editions But I had the shelf mark all of a sudden I thought I'm gonna check this shelf mark and what do you know it tried his copy and
Wow.
And that was bought in 1928.
I saw that.
I ran across it.
However it was sprung, we don't know.
But it was interesting just by that to be able to put it together because that copy had been given by another collector who had published a big book of his holdings in the 18th century.
So otherwise, that copy would be completely missing, excepting that I just happened to thread it together.
I go from the Haven chapter.
Haven was so incensed.
I think he said he was going to take all the books down to Arkansas or some other place.
Did you know that they own a house in Arkansas?
Of course, and the one in Acapulco, too.
Right.
So he felt really put upon to me.
blocked by the people of Cambridge and tearing down those buildings.
But you said that he actually went out there with a wrecker one day and started tearing stuff down.
Well, he wasn't running the ball and crane.
But the crane damaged the buildings so that they couldn't be restored.
So they had to be torn down.
So he succeeded to that extent.
But he intended to put up a tax-free institute, which did have the residents in the city
In something of an uproar.
The residents were in an uproar because they thought it was Harvard expansionism.
As a clandestine, as you said.
Exactly.
But his attitude was fury, I gather.
Is that right?
Yeah, he was quite upset to have that particular plan stymied.
And, of course, he led from the Martin Luther September Bible, Houghton,
Houghton Library for one of their exhibitions.
Was he a member of the friends over there, do you think?
Oh, yeah.
He always was giving contributions.
And they were always modest to us.
But he paid for some dinners, I think, and so on.
That was nice.
In connection with some of the exhibitions.
Very interesting.
Of one.
You're telling me about one.
Wolf-lying adventure so that you get a flavor of
what I'm up to as a collector.
There's two things I'm going to show you.
I'm going to show you the Castle of Knowledge, which is the one that our Freeman sold to me.
These books are all arranged by country.
We're looking at a little oak case.
perhaps maybe 40 books, but if that many.
Isn't that wonderful?
It's the first vernacular astronomy in English from... And that's, what is that second word?
That's not house, is it?
Castle.
Castle of Knowledge, and it's old enough that I suppose we have to look at the colophon to see when it was printed.
1556.
And it's wonderful because it does have
this Copernican quotation in the middle of it.
You realize this is 13 years after Copernicus's book has come out, and Copernicus has enough of a reputation that the young student, they're discussing Copernicus, a man of great learning and of much experience and wonderful diligence and observation.
hath renewed the opinion of Aristarchus Samnius.
And then the young scholar says, Nay, sir, in good faith I desire not to hear such vain fantasies, so far against common reason and repugnant to the consent of all the learned multitude of writers, and therefore let it pass forever and a day longer.
And the master says, You are too young to be a good judge in so great a manner.
It passes far, your learning.
Wow.
You didn't know this when you bought it, did you?
Oh, yeah, I do.
I did.
I knew what the book was.
And you can see why the young man who came to look at it thought it was such a neat copy, because it is a wonderfully crisp copy and an old binding.
It's slightly foxed, not even just a page.
Just lacks those few pages out of the... Are they there in facsimile?
No, no, it's just totally without.
That's... And then you've got a quaritch, you said.
Quaritch is...
That was one of many books that Quaritches have helped me acquire.
I'm very happy about booksellers.
Good booksellers are very keen to help their customers build their collections, and as they understand your collection, they will go to some pains to point out things that you might want to buy.
It helps them, and it helps you.
So one day, Rick Watson at Quaritches...
rang up to say that at the Bloomsbury auction, which I would probably not know about, there was coming up an unusual set of Michael Mestland's ephemerides, a very bad condition, sold subject, not subject to return, and that there was some problem about it being incomplete in the front matter.
And he said that the estimated bid was very low, something like 50 pounds.
And I said, look, I've been trying to get Mestland's Ephemerides for 15 years, and there's simply never been a copy on the market.
So it's got to be worth more than that, even if it's in this tacky shape.
So why don't you bid for it for me, and let's, you know, go 10 times higher.
So they bid for it for me, and they, in fact, called up a couple days later to say they had got it.
But they had bought it sight unseen because they hadn't gone...
to check out the things in the auction beforehand.
They said, yeah, it is pretty tatty at the beginning.
But, well, first of all, let me show it to you.
There it is.
It's got this wonderful picture of Michael Mestland on the back, but it's also very instructive to show the students because you can actually see the teeth of the rodents as they worked around the face.
Could you spell, I just wanted to get his name.
It's M-A-E-S-T-L-I-N.
He's the teacher of Johannes Kepler.
So wherever these unbound pages were, they were where the rats could get at them.
But the wonderful thing is that the, although the front matter is tattered and quite incomplete, the ephemerities themselves are here.
Now what are ephemerities?
Tables of positions of planets day by day.
Mm-hmm.
What is wonderful is that this is exactly as it was sold at the Frankfurt Book Fair.
Wow.
You see, totally uncut, unbound, even mostly unfolded.
You can see here, for example, the little pinholes runs here, and the other is here.
This went down on the press over those holes so that they could flip it and get the other side registered.
It was never bound.
So you can see how wonderful the registration is from back and front.
But were they folded and—they were.
Was it ever bound into a book?
This has never been bound.
This is still in the original sheets, just as it came from the book fair.
Well, where do you think it had been all those years?
It's probably been never read.
Well, it's not only never been read, but they said— I mean, is that a fair assumption?
Well, this particular copy has never been read.
This is just sort of in bulk, the way it—
the way it came.
Maybe it was a remainder.
Maybe it was ever sold.
No, it was probably bought by a book dealer, but never had occasion either to sell it or to bind it, because they said there's something wrong with it, something else wrong with it.
They said there's this letter here published in it from 1597, printed, 1596, and this is a book from 1580.
So what's that doing in the front matter?
It said, it's planetary, it's something, astronomical hypotheses.
And I said, that's great.
Mestland did a little university disputation on astronomical hypotheses.
It was published in a small number of copies, very ephemeral.
It's almost impossible to find this thing.
I'm pleased you must have got my mistake, this thing.
No, they said, we don't think it's that.
It doesn't seem to be from Mestland.
Anyway, they said, this letter looks like it's from Johannes Kepler.
Now, who's they talking?
This is Rick Watson from Quorage.
It was he.
He was telling me about this purchase for me.
Kepler, I said, oh, no.
I said, this just cannot be.
But there is the letter of Kepler's that was published in something called Astronomical Hypotheses by Nicholas Ramirez Ursus, a man who got into a plagiarism battle with Tycho Brahe.
And it was such a scurrilous pamphlet.
that Tico had a court case against him and had all the copies burned, excepting just the few that happened to have been distributed before he had a chance to get at him.
And lo and behold... And they said, why, I think that's it.
Here is Ursus' name.
Wow.
So the first signature is not present.
Otherwise, they would have known exactly what it was.
But otherwise, here is a...
an imperfect copy of this tract.
Here's the letter from Kepler, for example.
So it was everything that you had dreamed of and more.
Well, this is one of the very few cases where one can accidentally buy a rare book.
Wow.
You see, there's the letter.
1595.
From Kepler.
The name seems to be misspelled.
It's magnificent.
A paper is wonderful, isn't it?
That's a nice rag.
And Tico had his nose cut off in a duel, or part of his nose, and nobody ever knew for sure which part.
But this book explains it.
He says that he was having dinner with some friends, and this subject came up.
He would not mention it himself, but that his friends were making jokes about it, that Tico did not need any instruments.
All he had to do was to look up and cite
through the nostrils of his nose.
So apparently it was his bridge that was... Does this have a title, by the way?
De Astronomisis Hypothesibus.
A-S-T-R-O-N-O-M-I-C-I-S, that's de, D-E-H-Y-P-O-T-H-E-S-I-B, that's a U, but it looks like a U. U-S.
And that was printed in... S-E-V, that's the system of the world.
This is published in 1597, and here are the diagrams of the different systems of the world that were in doubt about this plagiarism.
Do you suspect this is a unique copy?
No, it's not a unique copy.
I immediately telephoned to a colleague in Cambridge, England, who was making a translation of parts of this, and he said, my God, you must have got the third known copy.
And I said, nope.
It's a fourth unknown.
I said it's not quite as rare as that.
There are about two dozen copies now, and so it's not terribly rare.
It's pretty rare.
It's nice.
Here is what was for many years the standard biography of Tycho Brahe, written by J. L. E. Dreyer.
This happens to be Dreyer's own author's annotated copy of it.
That's pretty nice.
And you can see he's mentioning the book down here.
And he indicates that it is so rare that he had not been able to see it when he was doing the biography.
That makes you feel pretty good, doesn't it?
And then he's written in a little footnote there saying that he now had seen a copy in the... And when was this written?
This is 1890.
These are the notes that he was making for the next 20 years in the book.
He did this whole series of Kiko Brahe papers, and it's the standard edition after he did the biography.
So what this is is all of the...
correlations between the book and his big addition there.
That's a great story.
I'd better run, but I thought I would give you a little bit of a clue that I'm having a good time collecting books.
Well, I think you're having a great time.